---
object-id: 3point15
short_name: 3_15
layout: version
version: 3.15
title: Ethics Checklist for COVID-19 Visualizations
date: 2020-05-15
image:
pdf:
article-link: https://medium.com/nightingale/ethical-design-recommendations-for-covid-19-visualizations-cb4a2677ae40
summary: This version of the ethical visualization workflow was developed for the Data Visualization Society Working group on COVID-19 visualization. It was presented as part of an article on COVID-19 visualization in Nightingale, the DVS publication. Although this version is significantly different to other versions, it's development informed future iterations of the workflow and poster.
---
## The steps

### Understanding
- **Partner up**  
Find a subject expert to partner with. This is a person with in-depth subject expertise on healthcare, epidemiology, biostatistics, pandemics, and/or public policy.
- **Empathize**  
Understand your audience and represented subjects. Consider bringing the voice of the patient into your process, particularly when visualizing sensitive data stories, including the human toll of COVID-19.

- **Get strategic**  
Identify your specific audience. Determine what they need to know that you can say with the data at hand, and how important it is that they understand your message. People are making decisions with the information they’re seeing — do I continue to stay home and practice social distancing? Are things getting better near me?

- **Identify stakes**  
Your proposed visualization could be misused or harm someone (particularly from a high-risk group). Charts may feel objective, but they can be easily misused particularly around a highly charged topic. Revisit this consideration throughout your design process as you make choices around the visual forms, colors, text, and narratives you reinforce with your visualization. If there is a strong potential for misuse or misunderstanding, revisit your intention in creating the visualization.

### Data

- **Approach your data the way a journalist approaches a source**  
If you’re visualizing COVID-19 case or deaths data, take the time to understand how the data was collected and its limitations. While a number of companies and media outlets have made ready-to-visualize case datasets publicly available, the case data is complex.

- **Relatable context**  
Avoid presenting case counts without additional reference information about who is impacted and how. Supplement COVID-19 datasets with information and/or data points that are relatable and meaningful to your audience.

- **Appropriate comparisons**  
If including comparisons between different states or countries, ensure the definitions of your measures are the same. If there is variance (for example, one state includes probable cases in the ‘confirmed case’ count and another does not), state those differences explicitly.

- **Avoid calculations**  
Epidemiological math is hard. While they may seem straight-forward, calculations such as summary statistics and case fatality ratios require a more nuanced understanding in a pandemic. Leave it to your subject matter expert, or draw only from existing published measures from reputable sources like the WHO or CDC.

### Designing

- **Title clearly**  
State your main finding in the title. Use language your audience will understand, but avoid unnecessary jargon.

- **Annotate, annotate, annotate**  
Explicitly emphasize key takeaways with words. Make the key points easier for your users to understand quickly.

- **Include totals**  
Explicitly state totals related to your charted data. Good example of denominator in a caption: ‘This represents 7k cases with the required detailed data out of 122K total cases.’ Bad example: ‘This represents 7K cases’ (not enough detail).

- **Include definitions**  
Provide definitions of specialist terms. Footnotes can be used to clarify technical economic and medical terms where necessary.

- **Timestamp and sign your work**  
Include authorship as well as date and time of sourced data on the chart image. Be transparent about your affiliations, expertise, funding, and biases. With information being shared so rapidly, it’s important to be able to rapidly identify who visualized what, and when.

- **Design mobile-first**  
Most people are checking COVID-19 data on their phones. Consider how your work will display on mobile, and design mobile-first where possible. If you will not support smaller device formats, then acknowledge this with a note.

- **Prioritize accessibility**  
Many visualizations of COVID-19 are not accessible to people with visual impairments or cognitive disabilities. Use visualization tools that are compatible with screen readers or other assistive devices, and conduct accessibility checks before publishing. Consider how the full range of human diversity will be able to interpret and understand your visualizations.

- **Color restraint**  
To emphasize key data points use high-saturation color. De-emphasize other features with low contrast colors, in accessible color palettes. Pay attention to local color meanings in the location where your visualization will be seen.

- **State limits**  
Clearly state uncertainties in footnotes. This is particularly important when plotting correlated variables (which may imply causal relationships to some people) and when significant numbers of cases are missing data for more detailed analysis of outcomes.

### After Publishing

- **Track impact**  
Follow discussions about your visualization. Be prepared to adjust and/or update your visualization to mitigate any potentially harmful assumptions being made based on your chart or to clarify misinterpretations.

- **Update manually**  
Don’t passively allow a script to update your numbers. Monitor incoming trends for any anomalies or outliers, follow updated documentation on your data source(s), and correct for harmful assumptions.
